TO SEE THIS REPORT IN A MORE EASY ON THE EYE FORMAT PLEASE VISIT:
https://bens.data.blog/2019/12/05/using-foursquare-to-classify-tube-stations/


Introduction
The London underground system is the oldest underground metro in the world.
It consists of 11 lines linking 270 stations. In 2017/18 it carried nearly 1.4 billion passengers

For my Capstone project, I will be looking into the neighbourhoods that each station is found in. 
By analyzing the venues surrounding each station I will be able to group them and also determine what is 
their primary usage, whether they serve an area which is mostly residential, office, commercial based etc.

The target audience for this analysis would be TfL (Transport for London) and local government for town 
planning purposes. It will show what the system is being used for, how people travel from home to work 
or entertainment, and where expansion of the network may be required.

Data
The data I will require to execute this project will include:

1. The geo locations of each of the stations on the network (which I will scrape from Wikipedia). 
From this I will be able to extract the latitude and logitude of each of the stations which will allow
me to plot them on a map and to find the venues near to their location.

2. The Foursquare dataset which I will access to ascertain the primary venue types surrounding each
station. This could be ‘residential’, or ‘education’, or ‘bars & restaurants’ etc. I will pass the
Foursquare API the latitude and longitude coordinates for each underground station and it will return
to me the varieties of venue in the surrounding area.

Based on the primary venue types surrounding each station I will be able to do a cluster analysis 
to identify groups of stations and examine what these groups have in common / what differentiates 
them from other groups.

Methodology
1 – Scraping and wrangling data
In the first place we used a module called BeautifulSoup to scrap the table of station names along 
with the latitude and longitude values from the wikipedia page mentioned above. We limited ourselves 
to the columns which were required for our analysis and converted it into a dataframe. Some
wrangling was necessary where the table included duplicate values and explanatory text in numerical 
columns.

2 – Calling the Foursquare API for data about venues surrounding each station
Once we had the dataframe of stations with their geo-locations, we created a function to call the 
Foursquare API and query the total results for each high level category of venue within a given radius
of each station. The function updated a new dataframe to show the totals of each venue type alongside 
each station.

3 – Exploring and clustering the data
Now we had a usable dataset showing the list of stations, their geo-locations and the totals for each 
venue type surrounding them. We transformed this into an array and scaled it so that it was possible 
to create boxplots using the module seaborn for the numbers of venue types on both an absolute and a 
relative basis. We also ran a K-means cluster on the dataset to group the stations into 5 clusters 
based on the total number of venue types surrounding them.

4 – Creating a map with stations colour-coded by cluster
By adding the cluster labels back onto the dataset of station names and geo-locations, we used the 
folium module to create a map of London and superimpose the stations, colour-coded to show where 
the clusters lie.

Results
From our first analysis of the number of venue types it was clear that the category of “Food” has 
the highest number of venues in London. Several categories such as Arts, Educational and Residential 
were significantly lower, and the more commercial venue types had significantly more ratings. This is 
probably because the primary way people use Foursquare is to rate commercial locations rather than 
every building.


When we clustered our stations we saw the following.

We can characterise these clusters as follows:

Cluster 0 (blue in map below) – Scored low across all venue types.
Cluster 1 (green in map below) – Scored highly in Food, Nightlife and Professional venues.
Cluster 2 (orange in map below) – Scored highly in Food, Residence and to a lesser extent Professional venues.
Cluster 3 (red in map below) – Had middling to low scores in most categories
Cluster 4 (white in map below) – Scored the highest in all venue types except for residential

If we plot the stations on a map and colour code them by the clusters we just discussed then the picture becomes clearer.

Blue stations – our low scoring cluster 0, these stations are far outside central London

Red stations – our middling to low scoring cluster 3, these stations are on the outskirts of central 
London. They have more venues than the blue stations, but still far fewer than those in central London

Green stations – food, nightlife and professional venues, cluster 1: the square mile, the City of 
London. Lots of busy bankers looking for lunch and a night out.

Orange stations – food, arts and professional venues, cluster 2: the West End. Not as many professional
venues as the City but still a very busy, very touristy part of London.

White stations – cluster 4, scoring highly across the board we find central London. No surprises there.

Discussion

There are a number of limitations to this analysis that should be borne in mind related to the fact that 
it relies entirely on the Foursquare data.

Firstly, Foursquare does not represent everything. It is to be expected that the highest number of venues
to be found are food and other commercial venues, since people use the service to rate and review places
where they have spent money. It is likely that since people do not rate every single building, categories
such as residential in particular will be significantly underrepresented.

Secondly, Foursquare does not account for the sizes of venues. A large university in one part of London 
may educate and house thousands of students but it will only count as 1 venue, just as each ice cream
kiosque or burger stand will count as 1 venue despite being many times smaller.

Conclusion
Despite the limitations of the Foursquare data discussed above, it was possible to identify general areas 
of London and characterise them based on the kinds of venue that proliferate in them. Further analysis could
be based on the number of addresses in each postcode to try to cross reference that to find the hidden venues,
or some kind of weighting based on venue size could be attempted.
